Merge the "Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL" blogpost into staging (#3650)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-04-29-simplifying-nosql-database-integration-with-jakarta-nosql.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dearrudam
author_github: https://github.com/dearrudam
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: In the data-driven age of AI and cloud computing, the choice of data storage—relational or NoSQL databases—crucially influences a solution's success. For relational databases within Java, the Java Persistence API (JPA) is the established standard. However, NoSQL databases have lacked standardization, leaving developers to navigate a plethora of vendor-specific solutions. The Jakarta NoSQL specification addresses this gap by providing a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA, simplifying development across various NoSQL databases. This post will delve into how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Learn how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases with Liberty. The Jakarta NoSQL specification provides a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA, simplifying development across various NoSQL databases.
```

> blog_description: "In the data-driven age of AI and cloud computing, the choice of data storage—relational or NoSQL databases—crucially influences a solution's success. For relational databases within Java, the Java Persistence API (JPA) is the established standard. However, NoSQL databases have lacked standardization, leaving developers to navigate a plethora of vendor-specific solutions. The Jakarta NoSQL specification addresses this gap by providing a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA, simplifying development across various NoSQL databases. This post will delve into how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: "Learn how Jakarta NoSQL together with Jakarta Data can ease the development process for Java developers using NoSQL databases with Liberty. The Jakarta NoSQL specification provides a standard-based, easy-to-learn framework that mirrors the familiar JPA, simplifying development across various NoSQL databases."
```

// "[.img_border_light]" = This adds a faint grey border around the image to make its edges sharper. Use it around screenshots but not
// around diagrams. Then double check how it looks.
// There is also a "[.img_border_dark]" class which tends to work best with screenshots that are taken on dark backgrounds.
// Change "FILE_NAME" to the name of the image file. Also make sure to put the image into the right folder which is: img/blog
// change the "IMAGE CAPTION" to a couple words of what the image is
// // // // // // // //

In the data-driven age of AI and cloud computing, choosing the right data storage solution directly impacts the success of a solution. We currently have two major data storage approaches to rely on: relational and NoSQL databases. Within the Java space, when it comes to working with relational databases, the Java Persistence API (JPA) specification has undoubtedly established itself as a robust and widely adopted API. In contrast, the crowded landscape of NoSQL database options opens a large set of integration options for developers, who instead of relying on standards, often find themselves learning and depending on vendor's proposed solutions.

> > "The way you define data storage and code design will either facilitate or hinder the project's maintainability, performance, scalability, and ability to change databases later on."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way you define data storage and code design will either facilitate or hinder the project's maintainability, performance, scalability, and ability to change databases later on.
```

Reviewer: Is this a famous quote? If it is, feel free to leave the speech marks in and add a reference to who said this to the end. Otherwise, I think this may work better without them.

Fortunately, the Java community adopting NoSQL storage solutions no longer needs to worry about these concerns. The Jakarta NoSQL specification offers a well-defined, standard-based implementation with a low learning curve and familiar coding APIs, thanks to its similarities with the widely-adopted JPA specification.

Join us in this comprehensive article as we explore Jakarta NoSQL and how this specification can simplify developers' lives, no matter which NoSQL database is used by their applications!

== Introduction to NoSQL

=== Understanding NoSQL Databases

The market has different views on the meaning of the name "NoSQL": while some believe it is an acronym for "Not Only SQL", others understand it as "Non-SQL" or "Not relational". Regardless of these different interpretations, there's an undeniable aspect of this solution: *NoSQL databases are fundamentally different in terms of data storage and management when compared to SQL*.

==== Key Differences: SQL vs NoSQL

> By looking into the differences between SQL and NoSQL, we can notice the following differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what are the differences between these two?
In the table below we can see the key differences between SQL and NoSQL:
```

|===
|Description |SQL Databases |NoSQL Databases

|_Data Storage_
|Use tabular relations to store and retrieve data
|Provide mechanisms for retrieving and storing unstructured and semi-structured data (non-relational)

|_Schema_
|Predefined schemas
|No predefined schemas

|_Scalability_
|Vertical scalability (scale up)
|Horizontal scalability (scale out)

|_Data Distribution_
|Data distributed across fewer servers
|Data distributed across many servers

|_Suitability_
|Better suited for smaller, structured datasets
|Well-suited for handling large and growing datasets

|_Industry Adoption_
|Traditionally used in many industries
|Gaining popularity in industries like finance and streaming

|===

> Now that we've explored fundamental differences between SQL and NoSQL databases, let's have an overview of the different types of NoSQL databases, each designed to solve specific problems with unique data models and architectures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This table helps to highlight how different SQL and NoSQL databases are. 
Now that we've explored the fundamental differences between them, let's focus more on NoSQL databases. The next section takes a look at an overview of the different types of NoSQL databases, each designed to solve specific problems with unique data models and architectures.
```

==== Exploring NoSQL Database Types

> In the NoSQL space, each database type aims to solve different needs. Below is an overview of the *Key-Value*, *Document*, *Column*, and *Graph* databases, the most popular non-relational storage approaches;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the NoSQL space, each database type aims to solve different needs. Below is an overview of the *Key-Value*, *Document*, *Column*, and *Graph* databases, four of the most popular non-relational storage approaches:
```

> ===== Key-Value Databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion:
1. Key-Value Databases
```

> The simplest storage types approach of the NoSQL database types. Data is stored as a collection of key-value pairs. It's ideal for getting information when you know the specific key, like finding a contact in your phone by their name.The structure resembles the Java `java.util.Map` API, where values are mapped to keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest storage types approach of the NoSQL database types. Data is stored as a collection of key-value pairs. It's ideal for getting information when you know the specific key, like finding a contact in your phone by their name. The structure resembles the Java `java.util.Map` API, where values are mapped to keys. Key-value databases are often used for caching, session management, and message queues.
```

> Key-value databases are often used for caching, session management, and message queues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/key-value-nosql.png[Key-value database type,align="center" width=25%,height=25%]

> Here are examples of vendors currently offering key-value solutions: *Amazon DynamoDB*, *Redis*, *Hazelcast* and *Memcached*. The last three are open source technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vendors currently offering key-value solutions, includes: *Amazon DynamoDB*, *Redis*, *Hazelcast* and *Memcached*. The last three in this list are open source technologies.
```

> ===== Document Databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Document Databases
```

> Document databases are designed to store, retrieve, and manage documents with minimally defined structures, such as XML and JSON formats.A document without a predefined structure is a data model that may be composed of multiple fields to hold different data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Document databases are designed to store, retrieve, and manage documents with minimally defined structures, such as XML and JSON formats. A document without a predefined structure is a data model that may be composed of multiple fields to hold different data types. Since it's possible to design models that holds documents inside other documents, Domain-Driven Design (DDD) practitioners can leverage document aggregates to manage their derived entities in a hierarchical structure. Document databases are well-suited for managing unstructured data, such as user profiles, product catalogs, or content management systems.
```

> Since it's possible to design models that holds documents inside other documents, Domain-Driven Design (DDD) practitioners, can leverage document aggregates to manage their derived entities in a hierarchical structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Document databases are well-suited for managing unstructured data, such as user profiles, product catalogs, or content management systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/document-nosql.png[Document database type,align="center" width=25%,height=25%]

Key vendors providing document database solutions are: *MongoDB*, *Couchbase*, *Elastic*, *Oracle NoSQL Database*.

> ===== Column Databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Column Databases
```

> The Column databases (also known as column-oriented or wide-column databases) store data as columns instead of rows (common in traditional relational databases). This approach is a differentiator across other types, as it's an efficient way to handle large amounts of data and run performant complex queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Column databases (also known as column-oriented or wide-column databases) store data as columns instead of rows (common in traditional relational databases). This approach is a differentiator across other types, as it's an efficient way to handle large amounts of data and run performant complex queries. This type is designed and optimized for storing large amounts of structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data with a flexible schema, and supports high levels of concurrency and scalability. Wide-column databases are often used for analytics, content management, and data warehousing.
```

> This type is designed and optimized for storing large amounts of structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data with a flexible schema, and supports high levels of concurrency and scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Wide-column databases are often used for analytics, content management, and data warehousing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/column-nosql.png[Column database type,align="center" width=25%,height=25%]

Examples of Column databases on the market include *Apache HBase*, *Apache Cassandra*, *Scylla*, *Azure Cosmos DB*, and many others. The first two mentioned here are open source technologies.

> ===== Graph Databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Graph Databases
```

> The Graph NoSQL database is optimized for storing and querying data with complex relationships. In this approach, data is managed as a graph where entities can be represented as nodes and edges, resulting in performant management of complex relationship and hierarchies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Graph NoSQL database is optimized for storing and querying data with complex relationships. In this approach, data is managed as a graph where entities can be represented as nodes and edges, resulting in performant management of complex relationship and hierarchies. The graph data resembles the graph of objects in the Oriented-Object Programming (OOP) paradigm. Graph NoSQL database solutions are a good fit for scenarios that require fast querying of highly interconnected data, such as social networks, recommendation engines, and fraud detection systems.
```

> The graph data resembles the graph of objects in the Oriented-Object Programming (OOP) paradigm. Graph NoSQL database solutions is a good fit for scenarios that require fast querying of highly interconnected data, such as social networks, recommendation engines, and fraud detection systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/graph-nosql.png[Graph database type,align="center" width=25%,height=25%]

> Engines to choose from today, are *Neo4J*, *Arango DB*, *OrientDB*, *JanusGraph*, among others. The last one mentioned is open source technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Engines to choose from today, are *Neo4J*, *Arango DB*, *OrientDB*, *JanusGraph*, among others. The last one mentioned is an open source technology.
```

==== Challenges of NoSQL Integration

Modern solution's requirements frequently requires the capabilities and benefits of different types of NoSQL databases, therefore, we should be able to work with multiple NoSQL solutions, coming from different vendors. Having said that, we can expect to face challenges such as:

> * A high cognitive load necessary when choosing a NoSQL database for their solutions;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A high cognitive load necessary when choosing a NoSQL database for our solutions;
```

* A significant learning curve derived from usage of different database APIs;
* Extra time invested on changing/maintaining existing codebase;

> * Potentially increase in complexity when onboarding new developers to the team;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A potential increase in complexity when onboarding new developers to the team;
```

> Furthermore, in the cloud era and the consumption-based pricing models, we must consider ways to deliver solutions with efficient resource consumption for costs reduction. This is how potential discussions may arise, opening possibility for considering changes of the underlying database used by existing applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Trying to reduce costs and be as cost-efficient as possible within the cloud and its consumption-based pricing model
```

> In addition to the challenges above, a solution based on NoSQL must be flexible and designed with a concise isolation between business logic and the underlying persistence layer given the high probability of changes being made to both layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The requirements to be flexible and design databases with concise isolation between business logic and the underlying persistence layer given the high probability of changes being made to both layers.
```

Reviewer: I would just add these as additional bullet points to the list above rather than calling them out in their own paragraph.

[NOTE]

> As of February 2024, the https://db-engines.com/en/ranking[DB-Engines Ranking], an initiative that aims to list and rank DBMS by popularity, there are over **180 non-relational/NoSQL databases available in the market**.

Reviewer: What does DBMS stand for? Have we defined this elsewhere?

These are specifications proposing a simpler NoSQL integration and abstract aspects of database vendors, allowing for developers to manipulate data with intuitive and developer-friendly APIs.

=== Jakarta NoSQL

https://jakarta.ee/specifications/nosql/[Jakarta NoSQL] is a https://jakarta.ee/[Jakarta EE] specification designed to easily integrate Java and NoSQL databases. It uses common annotations and specific APIs for key-value, column, and document databases.

=== Jakarta Data

The https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/[Jakarta Data] specification, part of https://jakarta.ee/[Jakarta EE], proposes a unified API for simplified data access across different types of databases, from relational to NoSQL databases.

Jakarta Data achieves its goal by introducing concepts like Repositories and custom query methods, improving the developer experience when using data retrieval and manipulation APIs.

[NOTE]
Jakarta Data is planned for officially becoming part of https://jakarta.ee/specifications/data/1.0/[Jakarta EE 11]

=== Eclipse JNoSQL: A Reference Implementation

A Jakarta EE Specification can't solve the problem by itself - it becomes consumable through an _implementation_.

> Each Jakarta EE Specification has at least one implementation. The existance of an implementation proves the proposed specification is achievable and can be developed by interested third-parties. This is when companies and communities actively starts providing their own implementations, empowering the Jakarta EE developers and ecosystem with a diverse and powerful toolset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Jakarta EE Specification has at least one implementation. The existance of an implementation proves the proposed specification is achievable and can be developed by interested third-parties. This is when companies and communities actively start providing their own implementations, empowering the Jakarta EE developers and ecosystem with a diverse and powerful toolset.
```

[source, java]
----
var baseDocument = new BaseDocument();
baseDocument.addAttribute(name, value);
----
****

[.img_border_light]
****
image::https://jnosql.github.io/img/logos/couchbase.svg[Couchbase,align="left" width=25%,height=25%]
[source, java]
----
var jsonObject = JsonObject.create();
jsonObject.put(name, value);
----
****

[.img_border_light]
****
image::https://jnosql.github.io/img/logos/orientdb.png[Orient Project,align="left" width=25%,height=25%]
[source, java]
----
var document = new ODocument("collection");
document.field(name, value);
----
****

With Eclipse JNoSQL, developers can use a common API to integrate with different database types, free of vendor lock-in, and with a low cognitive load during learning phases. For example, using the Document API, it's possible to switch between MongoDB and ArangoDB as needed, based on Convention Over Configuration (CoC).

[.img_border_light]
****
image::https://jnosql.github.io/images/home_logo.png[Eclipse JNoSQL Project,align="left" width=25%,height=25%]
[source, java]
----
var entity = CommunicationEntity.of("collection");
entity.add(name, value);
----
****

> Check out some of the Jakarta NoSQL annotations:

Reviewer: Might be nice to have more of a link to the section below. So maybe something like...
"Check out some of the Jakarta NoSQL annotations that Eclipse JNoSQL enables:" (if this is correct?)

[source, java]
----
import jakarta.nosql.Entity;
import jakarta.nosql.Id;
import jakarta.nosql.Column;

@Entity
public class Book {

    @Id
    private String isbn;

    @Column
    private String title;

    @Column
    private String author;

    @Convert(YearConverter.class)
    @Column
    private Year year;

}
----

> When using Java 17+, Eclipse JNoSQL allows the usage of Java Records as entities:

Reviewer: Similar comment for this one too - would be nice to maybe have more linkage to the section before

                   @Convert(YearConverter.class) @Column("year") Year year,
                   @Column("edition") int edition) {

}

----

Last but not least, Eclipse JNoSQL, as a Jakarta Data implementation, allows us to create repositories, enabling Domain-Driven Development (DDD) capabilities through the usage of the Repository pattern. This approach simplifies developers who seek to bring the code closer to the business (domain-centric) instead of working with database semantics.

[source,java]
----
import jakarta.data.page.Page;
import jakarta.data.page.PageRequest;
import jakarta.data.repository.Delete;
import jakarta.data.repository.Repository;
import jakarta.data.repository.DataRepository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Query;
import jakarta.data.repository.Param;
import jakarta.data.repository.Save;

@Repository
public interface Garage extends DataRepository<Car,String>{

    @Save
    Car park(Car car);

    @Delete
    Car unPark(Car car);

    @Query("select * from Car where driver.name = @name")
    Set<Car> findByDriver(@Param("name") String name);

    Page<Car> findByColor(Color color, PageRequest pageRequest);

}
----

==== What to expect from Eclipse JNoSQL

> Beyond being a Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data implementation, such framework intents to reaching out these goals:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond being a Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data implementation, other goals of this framework include:
```

* Increase productivity performing common NoSQL operations
* Use of Convention Over Configuration
* Rich Object Mapping integrated with Contexts and Dependency Injection (CDI)
* Java-based Query and Fluent-API
* Persistence lifecycle events
* Low-level mapping using Standard NoSQL APIs
* Specific template API to each NoSQL category
* Annotation-oriented using JPA-like naming when it makes sense
* Extensible to explore the particular behavior of a NoSQL database
* Explore the popularity of Apache TinkerPop in Graph API

== Next Steps: Continuing the Journey

Congratulations on getting this far!

> After getting an overview about the Jakarta NoSQL, Jakarta Data, and the Eclipse JNoSQL, I invite you to explore these tools on a hands-on approach, managing and querying data from NoSQL databases and switching between NoSQL databases as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post has hopefully given you a solid foundational overview of Jakarta NoSQL, Jakarta Data, and Eclipse JNoSQL. Now that we've covered these basics, the next step is to apply this theory and try utiliing these tools in an interactive or hands-on manner. Use the links below to see how you can get hands-on to manage and query data from NoSQL databases and switch between NoSQL databases as needed.
```

> // This blog post is the 1st part of a set of blog posts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This blog post is part 1 of a 3-part blog series. Parts 2 and 3 provide a more hands-on deeper dive to Jakarta NoSQL and a fun game, JNopo, you can use to try this technology for yourself. Check them out to continue your learning on this subject:
```

//
// * link:../../../2024/04/17/jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.html[Jakarta NoSQL in Action: JNopo Game, window="_blank"];
// * link:../../../2024/04/20/jakarta-nosql-challenge-switching-nosql-easily.html[Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease, window="_blank"];

> To see same sample projects, take a look at the official Eclipse JNoSQL samples repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if you'd just like to see same sample projects, take a look at the official Eclipse JNoSQL sample repositories:
```

- https://github.com/jnosql/demos-se
- https://github.com/JNOSQL/demos-ee

> To learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, to learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:
```

- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-extensions

> if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above.
```

> Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me! Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!
```

> If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
